![](https://sa.bbc.co.uk/bbc/bbc/s?name=news.world.us_and_canada.story.45762281.page&ml_name=webmodule&ml_version=-1&blq_e=orbit&blq_r=orbit&blq_s=orbit&blq_v=default&language=en&pal_route=asset&language
=en-
GB&pal_webapp=tabloid&prod_name=news&app_name=news&cps_asset_id=45762281&page_type=Story&section=%2Fnews%2Fworld%2Fus_and_canada&first_pub=2018-10-05T11%3A51%3A16%2B00%3A00&last_editorial_update=2018-10-05T19%3A52%3A08%2B00%3A00&curie=315ec929-fe13-ec4f-9552-521a98dd82a6&title=Brett+Kavanaugh%3A+Key+test+vote+on+Supreme+Court+nominee+passes&has_video=1&topic_names=US+Supreme+Court%21Republican+Party%21Donald+Trump%21Brett+Kavanaugh%21United+States%21Democratic+Party&topic_ids=c6lw1qzwlp2t%21c349zr6w3zjt%21cp7r8vgl2lgt%21ckd0qpvlk36t%21cx1m7zg01xyt%21c9z6yqkgwl7t&for_nation=ch&app_version=1.259.0&app_type=responsive&bbc_site=news&blq_js_enabled=0)

Homepage

## Accessibility links

  * Skip to content
  * Accessibility Help

BBC iD

Notifications

  * Home
  * News
  * Sport
  * Weather
  * iPlayer
  * TV
  * Radio
  * CBBC
  * CBeebies
  * Food
  * Bitesize
  * Music
  * Earth
  * Arts
  * Make It Digital
  * Taster
  * Local
  * Tomorrow's World
  * Menu

Search

Search the BBCSearch the BBC

News

## BBC News Navigation

Sections

  * Home
  * Video
  * World selected
  * UK
  * Business
  * Tech
  * Science
  * Stories
  * Entertainment & Arts
  * Health
  * World News TV
  * In Pictures
  * Reality Check
  * Newsbeat
  * Special Reports
  * Explainers
  * The Reporters
  * Have Your Say

US & Canada selected

US & Canada

US & Canada

# Brett Kavanaugh: Key test vote on Supreme Court nominee passes

  * 5 October 2018

  * Share this with Facebook
  * Share this with Messenger
  * Share this with Twitter
  * Share this with Email
  * Share this with Facebook
  * Share this with WhatsApp
  * Share this with Messenger
  * Share this with Twitter
  * Share

Share this with

These are external links and will open in a new window

    * Email

Share this with Email

    * Facebook

Share this with Facebook

    * Messenger

Share this with Messenger

    * Messenger

Share this with Messenger

    * Twitter

Share this with Twitter

    * Pinterest

Share this with Pinterest

    * WhatsApp

Share this with WhatsApp

    * LinkedIn

Share this with LinkedIn

Copy this link

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-45762281

Read more about sharing.

These are external links and will open in a new window

Close share panel

![Kavanaugh and
Ford](https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/news/320/cpsprodpb/C773/production/_103695015_unfaf34234titled-1.jpg)
Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Judge Kavanaugh has vehemently
denied the allegations made by Prof Christine Blasey Ford

The US Senate has narrowly advanced President Donald Trump's Supreme Court
nominee Brett Kavanaugh's nomination to a final vote.

Friday's vote - 51-49 in favour - was a test of support for the embattled
nominee who has faced sexual assault allegations from several women.

All eyes are on several swing senators for Saturday's final vote.

Judge Kavanaugh's confirmation would tilt America's highest court in favour of
conservatives.

The nine-member panel has the final say on issues such as abortion, gun
control and voting rules and justices are appointed for life.

Skip Twitter post by @realDonaldTrump

> Very proud of the U.S. Senate for voting “YES” to advance the nomination of
Judge Brett Kavanaugh!

>

> -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 5, 2018

Report

End of Twitter post by @realDonaldTrump

Following Friday's vote, Mr Trump tweeted that he was "very proud".

  * What did the FBI inquiry into Kavanaugh result in?
  * The Brett Kavanaugh story in 300 words
  * The truth about false assault accusations

Hundreds of protesters against Judge Kavanaugh were arrested in Washington DC,
on Thursday, including comedian Amy Schumer.

After Friday's vote, dozens also were arrested outside Republican Senator Jeff
Flake's office. Mr Flake told reporters that unless "something big" changes,
he will vote to confirm Judge Kavanaugh.

![](https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/images/ic/720x405/p06mz2n2.jpg)

Media playback is unsupported on your device

Media captionProtesters take to Capitol Hill

## What was Friday's vote for?

Friday's "cloture" vote activated a 30-hour period of discussions in the
Senate, which will be followed by the final simple majority vote on Saturday.

Republicans have a 51-49 majority in the Senate. But two key swing senators
voted against their party colleagues: Republican Lisa Murkowski and Democrat
Joe Manchin.

Mr Manchin, of West Virginia, represents a traditionally Republican state that
Mr Trump won by a landslide. The self-described "most centrist Democrat" is
also up for re-election this year.

Ms Murkowski of Alaska, a state that also voted pro-Trump in 2016, has been
undecided on Judge Kavanaugh throughout the hearings.

She has been lobbied by sexual assault survivors to vote against the judge and
represents a state with the highest sex crime rate by far in America,
according to FBI data.

Despite deciding against the nominee on Friday, she told reporters afterwards
she has still not made up her mind on the confirmation vote, according to
Reuters news agency.

Another key Republican senator, Susan Collins, a moderate from Maine,
announced that she would vote in favour of Judge Kavanaugh on Saturday.

![](https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/images/ic/720x405/p06mvrmh.jpg)

Media playback is unsupported on your device

Media caption'Ford is a liar': Trump supporters' unequivocal backing for
Kavanaugh

Given that Republicans have a razor-thin margin of control in the Senate, the
party can potentially only afford another defection if it wants to confirm
Judge Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court - assuming the two swing senators vote
the same on Saturday.

Complicating matters, the office of Republican Steve Daines said on Thursday
he was planning to attend his daughter's wedding in Montana on Saturday. On
Friday morning, he was reported to be arranging travel back to Washington DC
for the final vote.

  * The truth about lie detector tests
  * Are young men in America scared?
  * Simple guide to mid-term elections

The judge has maintained he would be a neutral justice in a Wall Street
Journal editorial titled, "I am an independent, impartial judge".

Addressing his angry testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee, where he
branded the allegations against him an "orchestrated political hit", he wrote:
"I know that my tone was sharp, and I said a few things I should not have
said."

## Going down to the wire

 **Analysis by Anthony Zurcher, BBC News**

The margin of error for confirming Brett Kavanaugh has evaporated. With Lisa
Murkowski voting No on a key procedural motion, it seems very likely she will
be a No on the final vote, as well.

Republicans had one vote among their ranks to spare. Now, unless someone like
West Virginia Democrat Joe Manchin crosses party lines, they have to hold
ranks.

Arizona Senator Jeff Flake, whose change of heart prompted the current week-
long delay in a final vote, has signalled he's a probable Yes. Republicans
might be inclined to keep him comfortably sequestered in a quiet room in the
Capitol until tomorrow.

That leaves Susan Collins of Maine as the probable deciding vote. She'll
announce her intentions later on Friday. If she says she's a Yes, Mr Kavanaugh
can start shopping for Supreme Court robes. If she's a No, Saturday will get
very interesting.

## What was the FBI inquiry about?

Judge Kavanaugh has faced sexual assault allegations from several women, most
prominently Professor Christine Blasey Ford.

![](https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/images/ic/720x405/p06mcqzw.jpg)

Media playback is unsupported on your device

Media captionChristine Blasey Ford said she was "100%" sure Brett Kavanaugh
assaulted her

Both gave public testimony last week in which Prof Ford said she had been
assaulted by Judge Kavanaugh when they were both teenagers in 1982.

Judge Kavanaugh denied the claim - and allegations that he drank to the point
of memory loss at the time - in a feisty confrontation with senators.

After the testimony, President Trump agreed to a new FBI inquiry.

  * Why sexual assault survivors forget details
  * Ford's testimony through the eyes of a survivor

Federal agents are believed to have spoken to five witnesses regarding Prof
Ford's accusations and another four other witnesses involving a separate
accusation by Deborah Ramirez, who said the nominee had exposed himself to her
when they were both at Yale University. He denies Ms Ramirez's allegations,
too.

![](https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/images/ic/720x405/p06mywxx.jpg)

Media playback is unsupported on your device

Media captionFeinstein and McConnell have very different views on the FBI
report

Mr Trump and his fellow Republicans said the new FBI report had cleared their
nominee.

But Democratic senators said it had been incomplete.

The lawyers of both women have also complained that several witnesses they had
offered to the FBI to corroborate their claims had not been contacted at all.

## Related Topics

  * US Supreme Court
  * Republican Party
  * Donald Trump
  * Brett Kavanaugh
  * United States
  * Democratic Party

##  Share this story About sharing

  * Email
  * Facebook
  * Messenger
  * Messenger
  * Twitter
  * Pinterest
  * WhatsApp
  * LinkedIn

## More on this story

  * Video Feinstein and McConnell differ sharply on FBI report on Kavanaugh 

4 October 2018

  * What did the FBI inquiry into Kavanaugh result in? 

4 October 2018

  * Kavanaugh confirmation: What Trump's 'elevator screamers' tweet tells us 

5 October 2018

  * Video Brett Kavanaugh: The women who support Trump's court pick 

24 September 2018

  * Brett Kavanaugh: The nomination and the allegations in 300 words 

5 October 2018

  * The truth about false assault accusations by women 

18 September 2018

  * Video Key moments from Christine Blasey Ford's testimony 

27 September 2018

## Top Stories

**Test vote win for US Supreme Court pick**

President Trump's nominee Brett Kavanaugh wins a key vote despite facing
sexual assault claims he denies.

5 October 2018

**Interpol chief vanishes on Chinese trip**

5 October 2018

**Chicago officer convicted of killing teen**

5 October 2018

##  Features

### Don't shoot, I'm disabled

### Stillbirth: I am a mother without a baby

### Quiz of the Week: Where's Kanye going to finish his album?

Video

### What makes a drink a cocktail?

### Africa's top shots: Taxi hats, weddings and hot chillies

### Why the laundry industry is in a spin to save water

### Caution urged over 'carbon unicorns'

### 'Dad saved my life - so I helped save his'

### The Grammy winner who makes music in a cupboard

##  Elsewhere on the BBC

###  Lyrics quiz

Have you been getting these songs wrong?

Full article Lyrics quiz

###  Feeling hot

What happens to your body in extreme heat?

Full article Feeling hot

Why you can trust BBC News

## BBC News Navigation

US & Canada

  * Home
  * Video
  * World selected

    * World Home
    * Africa
    * Asia
    * Australia
    * Europe
    * Latin America
    * Middle East
    * US & Canada selected

  * UK

    * UK Home
    * England
    * N. Ireland
    * Scotland
    * Wales
    * Politics

  * Business

    * Business Home
    * Market Data
    * Global Trade
    * Companies
    * Entrepreneurship
    * Technology of Business
    * Connected World
    * Global Education
    * Economy

  * Tech
  * Science
  * Stories
  * Entertainment & Arts
  * Health
  * World News TV
  * In Pictures
  * Reality Check
  * Newsbeat
  * Special Reports
  * Explainers
  * The Reporters
  * Have Your Say

## BBC News Services

  * On your mobile
  * On your connected tv
  * Get news alerts
  * Contact BBC News

## Explore the BBC

  * Home
  * News
  * Sport
  * Weather
  * iPlayer
  * TV
  * Radio
  * CBBC
  * CBeebies
  * Food
  * Bitesize
  * Music
  * Earth
  * Arts
  * Make It Digital
  * Taster
  * Local
  * Tomorrow's World

  * Terms of Use
  * About the BBC
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookies
  * Accessibility Help
  * Parental Guidance
  * Contact the BBC
  * Get Personalised Newsletters

 _Copyright (C) 2018 BBC._ The BBC is not responsible for the content of
external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

![](https://ssc.api.bbc.com/?c1=2&c2=19293874&ns_site=bbc&name=)

