Skip to main content

  * [](https://reliefweb.int/)
  * [Labs](https://labs.reliefweb.int)
  * [Blog](https://reliefweb.int/blog)
  * [Mobile](https://m.reliefweb.int/report/2425534)

[](https://www.facebook.com/reliefweb "ReliefWeb Facebook")
[](https://twitter.com/reliefweb "ReliefWeb Twitter")
[](https://www.linkedin.com/company/reliefweb "ReliefWeb LinkedIn")
[](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC4RQutFVU_1OSNtOzGyBfGw "ReliefWeb
Youtube")

  * [About Us](https://reliefweb.int/about)
  * [Help](https://reliefweb.int/help)
  *     * [Login / Register](https://reliefweb.int/user/login "Login to ReliefWeb.")

  * [Home](https://reliefweb.int/)
  * [Updates](https://reliefweb.int/updates "Updates")
  * [Countries](https://reliefweb.int/countries "Countries")
  * [Disasters](https://reliefweb.int/disasters "Disasters")
  * [Topics](https://reliefweb.int/topics)
  * [Organizations](https://reliefweb.int/organizations)
  * [Jobs](https://reliefweb.int/jobs "Jobs")
  * [Training](https://reliefweb.int/training "Training")

22 Jan 2018

  * [](https://www.facebook.com/sharer.php?u=https%3A//reliefweb.int/report/puerto-rico-united-states-america/quick-facts-hurricane-marias-effect-puerto-rico%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_campaign%3Dshared%26utm_source%3Dfacebook.com&t=Quick%20Facts%3A%20Hurricane%20Maria%27s%20Effect%20on%20Puerto%20Rico "Share this on Facebook")
  * [](https://twitter.com/share?url=https%3A//reliefweb.int/report/puerto-rico-united-states-america/quick-facts-hurricane-marias-effect-puerto-rico%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_campaign%3Dshared%26utm_source%3Dtwitter.com&text=Quick%20Facts%3A%20Hurricane%20Maria%27s%20Effect%20on%20Puerto%20Rico&via=reliefweb "Share this on Twitter")
  * [](https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A//reliefweb.int/report/puerto-rico-united-states-america/quick-facts-hurricane-marias-effect-puerto-rico%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_campaign%3Dshared%26utm_source%3Dplus.google.com "Share this on Google+")
  * [](https://www.linkedin.com/shareArticle?mini=true&url=https%3A//reliefweb.int/report/puerto-rico-united-states-america/quick-facts-hurricane-marias-effect-puerto-rico%3Futm_medium%3Dsocial%26utm_campaign%3Dshared%26utm_source%3Dlinkedin.com&title=Quick%20Facts%3A%20Hurricane%20Maria%27s%20Effect%20on%20Puerto%20Rico&summary=Filed%20by%3A%20Emma%20Schwartz%2C%20Information%20Officer%0A%0AOn%20the%20morning%20of%20Wednesday%2C%20September%2020%2C%202017%2C%20Hurricane%20Maria%20struck%20Puerto%20Rico%2C%20devastating%20the%20island%20and%20plunging%20all%20of%20its%203.4%20million%20residents%20into%20a%20desperate%20humanitarian%20crisis.%0A%0APuerto%20Rico%2C%20officially%20the%20Commonwealth%20of%20Puerto%20Rico%2C%20is%20an%20island%20territory%20of%20the%20United%20States%2C%20located%20in%20the%20northeast%20Caribbean%20Sea.%20It%E2%80%99s%20known%20for%20its%20white%20sand%20beaches%2C%20the%20historic%20city%20of%20Old%20San%20Juan%2C%20and%20El%20Yunque%20National%20Forest.&source=ReliefWeb "Post this on LinkedIn")
  * [](mailto:?subject=%5BReliefWeb%20report%5D%20Quick%20Facts%3A%20Hurricane%20Maria%27s%20Effect%20on%20Puerto%20Rico&body=Filed%20by%3A%20Emma%20Schwartz%2C%20Information%20Officer%0A%0AOn%20the%20morning%20of%20Wednesday%2C%20September%2020%2C%202017%2C%20Hurricane%20Maria%20struck%20Puerto%20Rico%2C%20devastating%20the%20island%20and%20plunging%20all%20of%20its%203.4%20million%20residents%20into%20a%20desperate%20humanitarian%20crisis.%0A%0APuerto%20Rico%2C%20officially%20the%20Commonwealth%20of%20Puerto%20Rico%2C%20is%20an%20island%20territory%20of%20the%20United%20States%2C%20located%20in%20the%20northeast%20Caribbean%20Sea.%20It%E2%80%99s%20known%20for%20its%20white%20sand%20beaches%2C%20the%20historic%20city%20of%20Old%20San%20Juan%2C%20and%20El%20Yunque%20National%20Forest.%0A%0ARead%20this%20in%20full%20on%20ReliefWeb%3A%20https%3A//reliefweb.int/report/puerto-rico-united-states-america/quick-facts-hurricane-marias-effect-puerto-rico%3Futm_medium%3Demail%26utm_source%3Duser%26utm_campaign%3Dshared&to= "Forward this page \(opens email client\)")

# Quick Facts: Hurricane Maria's Effect on Puerto Rico

Report

from [Mercy Corps](https://reliefweb.int/organization/mercy-corps)

Published on 19 Jan 2018 -- [View
Original](https://www.mercycorps.org/articles/united-states/quick-facts-
hurricane-marias-effect-puerto-rico)

![© Jonathan Drake for Mercy
Corps](https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/styles/report-
small/public/report-images/puertorico-201710-jdrake-0140.JPG?itok=r4kG1Ho4)

Carmen Milagro, 71, mops her kitchen floor as rain enters through her badly-
damaged roof four weeks after Hurricane Maria wreaked havoc across Puerto
Rico.

© Jonathan Drake for Mercy Corps

_Filed by: Emma Schwartz, Information Officer_

On the morning of Wednesday, September 20, 2017, Hurricane Maria struck Puerto
Rico, devastating the island and plunging all of its 3.4 million residents
into a desperate humanitarian crisis.

Puerto Rico, officially the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, is an island
territory of the United States, located in the northeast Caribbean Sea. It’s
known for its white sand beaches, the historic city of Old San Juan, and El
Yunque National Forest.

The archipelago had already been facing a recession for over a decade before
Hurricanes Irma and Maria hit. Almost half of residents lived below the
poverty line. The damaging effect of Hurricane Maria — the worst storm to
strike the island in over 80 years — will haunt residents for many years to
come. More than 200,000 Puerto Ricans, who are U.S. citizens, have left home
and arrived in the continental U.S. since the storm.

Many others will stay to help Puerto Rico recover. But they still need a lot
of support, from basic essentials, electricity, and clean water to the hard,
long-term work of recovery. And the 2018 hurricane season will be here before
we know it.

Read on for more about how Puerto Rico has been affected by the storm, what
Mercy Corps and partners are doing, and how you can help.

**What happened when Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico?**

Maria first made landfall near the southeastern town of Yabucoa. The powerful
Category 4 storm plowed across the island with sustained winds of 155 mph,
uprooting trees, downing weather stations and cell towers, and ripping wooden
and tin roofs off homes. Electricity was cut off to 100% of the island, and
access to clean water and food became limited for most.

Heavy rains and flash floods brought on by the storm exacerbated widespread
devastation, turning streets into rivers full of debris. In some areas,
floodwaters were waist-high — more than 30 inches deep — and often sewage-
ridden. Less than one percent of homeowners had flood insurance.

Some Puerto Ricans were forced to cross swollen rivers after bridges collapsed
to reach businesses where they could buy water and gas.

Hurricane Maria is the worst storm to hit Puerto Rico in over 80 years, and
arrived only two weeks after Hurricane Irma passed just north of the island
and left 1 million people without power. The effect on Puerto Rican families —
and the island’s infrastructure — will take many years to heal.

Despite the challenges, people are coming together to help their neighbors in
any way they can — whether by clearing debris or even passing on food aid to
those who need it more. People are committed to building back better than
before the storm.

**What’s been the effect of the hurricane?**

The scale of Maria’s destruction has been devastating, causing as much as $94
billion in damage — a crippling toll for an island that was already billions
of dollars in debt.

But the effects of the storm will undoubtedly be felt most by the people
themselves. While the official death toll is 64 people, recent analysis
suggests the storm might have resulted in more than 1,000 fatalities. The
storm left thousands of families without homes and destroyed some communities
entirely.

For months, most families and businesses remained without power, cell phone
service was limited, and clean water, food, medicine and fuel were all in very
short supply — for some, the struggle to access such basic essentials is still
a daily reality. Less than half of residents had their power restored two
months after the storm had passed. For many, it will take years to fully
recover.

**What are living conditions like now?**

More than four months have passed since Hurricane Maria made landfall, and
clear evidence of the storm remains. The lack of electricity, running water
and reliable communications remain central challenges to the Caribbean island
as it struggles to return to a semblance of normal life.

Roughly a third of Puerto Rico’s residents — some 1.2 million people — are
still living in the dark. After sunset, neighbors gather around generators or
sit by candlelight. The blackout has become the largest blackout in U.S.
history. Officials say it could take up to six months after the storm before
power is restored and the lights come back on.

Some residents still don’t have access to clean water. Even where water
service has been restored, many communities still have a “boil water” advisory
in place. Other areas are still purchasing bottled water to get the clean
water they need.

As of December, an estimated 60,000 houses were still roofless, and thousands
of people were still displaced, living in shelters or with friends or
relatives.

While most people have regained access to basic essentials, the road to
recovery is long, and many residents still need help.

Despite the need, Puerto Rico has struggled to secure adequate relief funds
from the U.S. government. A billion dollar loan recently approved by Congress
is now being withheld for the time being.

**Who's been most affected by the destruction?**

The storm disproportionately affected Puerto Rico’s poorest residents, who
have fewer resources on hand to help them recover and rebuild. Many of these
people live in more rural communities and the hard-to-reach areas of the
mountains, and can expect to be the last to regain access to water or see
their electricity restored.

Mercy Corps is focused on providing assistance to these vulnerable and
underserved populations, who are most likely to be missed in broader relief
efforts. This includes the elderly — many of whom depend on welfare or social
security — along with people with disabilities and those living in remote
rural areas, like the mountain towns of Las Marias and Maricao.

Children and young people are particularly vulnerable to the psychological
impacts of disaster, and many depend on the resources and support they find at
school to help them overcome trauma-induced stress. Hurricanes Irma and Maria
disrupted the lives of some 350,000 public school students. It took nearly
five weeks before the first public schools began to reopen after the storm,
though most were operating without power.

The majority of Puerto Rico’s public schools are now open, though some only
part-time. There is at least one school in every city on the island that still
doesn’t have power. Some schools have been converted into community centers
and shelters, forcing students to relocate and find alternate routes to resume
their studies. According to the Department of Education, six percent of Puerto
Rico’s students have left the island since Maria hit.

Those who remain will continue dealing with the consequences of a sustained
break in their educations, along with the stress of recovering from a natural
disaster.

**How is Mercy Corps helping?**

While most of our work focuses on international responses, we do respond to
domestic disasters in moments of extreme crisis. Given the monumental scale of
destruction and the need for additional help, Mercy Corps has been working
hard to support relief, recovery and rebuilding efforts in Puerto Rico in the
wake of Hurricane Maria.

In the immediate aftermath of the hurricane, we partnered with World Central
Kitchen, a nonprofit founded by celebrity chef José Andrés, to deliver more
than 25,000 meals to hard-hit communities.

Together with local organizations, we have distributed nearly $300,000 in
emergency cash so people can buy what they need most — items like water, food
and other essential supplies. Cash is a fast and flexible way to help people
after crisis and supports local markets as they recover from the effects of
Hurricane Maria.

We also distributed 5,000 solar lanterns and 2,500 water filters to thousands
of families now facing an uncertain future. Access to solar lights and water
filters, combined with training in their proper use, means that families are
better prepared for future storms. Experts predict that in 2018 we could see
another active hurricane season in the Caribbean, starting as early as June 1.

![](https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/country-icons/pri.png)

#### Primary country

[Puerto Rico (The United States of
America)](https://reliefweb.int/country/pri)

![](https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/styles/location-
image/public/country-location-images/dma.png?itok=n459IvQ0)

[Hurricane Maria - Sep
2017](https://reliefweb.int/disaster/tc-2017-000136-atg)

  * #### Content format:

    * [News and Press Release](https://reliefweb.int/updates?format=8)
  * #### Language:

    * [English](https://reliefweb.int/updates?language=267)
  * #### Theme:

    * [Food and Nutrition](https://reliefweb.int/updates?theme=4593)
    * [Recovery and Reconstruction](https://reliefweb.int/updates?theme=4601)
    * [Shelter and Non-Food Items](https://reliefweb.int/updates?theme=4603)
  * #### Disaster type:

    * [Tropical Cyclone](https://reliefweb.int/updates?disaster_type=4618)
  * #### Vulnerable groups:

    * [Children](https://reliefweb.int/updates?vulnerable_groups=6871)

  * [Home](https://reliefweb.int/)
  * [Updates](https://reliefweb.int/updates "Updates")
  * [Countries](https://reliefweb.int/countries "Countries")
  * [Disasters](https://reliefweb.int/disasters "Disasters")
  * [Topics](https://reliefweb.int/topics)
  * [Organizations](https://reliefweb.int/organizations)
  * [Jobs](https://reliefweb.int/jobs "Jobs")
  * [Training](https://reliefweb.int/training "Training")

  * [Terms & Conditions](https://reliefweb.int/terms-conditions)

### [ReliefWeb](https://reliefweb.int/)

#### Informing humanitarians worldwide.

A service provided by [](https://www.unocha.org)

ReliefWeb has been the leading online source for reliable and timely
humanitarian information on global crises and disasters since 1996.  
[Learn more about ReliefWeb](https://reliefweb.int/about)

[![The ReliefWeb
blog](https://reliefweb.int/profiles/reliefweb/themes/kobe/images/blog-
title.png)](https://reliefweb.int/blog)

## [Going mobile, version 2: Tell us what you
think!](https://reliefweb.int/blogpost/going-mobile-version-2-tell-us-what-
you-think)

We have just rebuilt the mobile version of our website. You may remember that
a while back we launched ReliefWeb Lite in a bid to better meet the needs of
users in low-bandwidth countries.

[Visit the blog](https://reliefweb.int/blog)

## Connect With ReliefWeb

Receive news about us

[](https://www.facebook.com/reliefweb "ReliefWeb Facebook")
[](https://twitter.com/reliefweb "ReliefWeb Twitter")
[](https://www.linkedin.com/company/reliefweb "ReliefWeb LinkedIn")
[](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC4RQutFVU_1OSNtOzGyBfGw "ReliefWeb
Youtube")

### Related Sites

[](https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/ "Humanitarian Response")

[](https://data.humdata.org/ "Humanitarian Data Exchange")

[](https://fts.unocha.org "Financial Tracking Service")

[](https://humanitarian.id "Humanitarian ID")

[](http://www.gdacs.org "Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System")

[](https://redhum.org "Red de Información Humanitaria para América Latina y el
Caribe")

[](http://www.inform-index.org "Inform Index")

[](https://cerf.un.org "Central Emergency Response Fund")

[](https://agendaforhumanity.org "Agenda for Humanity")

[](https://interagencystandingcommittee.org "Inter-Agency Standing Committee")

[](https://vosocc.unocha.org "Virtual OSOCC - real-time disaster
coordination")

[](https://www.insarag.org "International Search and Rescue Advisory Group")

[](https://www.preventionweb.net/ "PreventionWeb")

[](https://www.kobotoolbox.org/ "Kobo Toolbox")

### Submit Content

Share information through ReliefWeb to better inform humanitarians worldwide.

[How to submit content](https://reliefweb.int/share)

### Tools

  * [API](https://reliefweb.int/help/api) \- Real-time data stream to power next-generation apps.
  * [Location Maps](https://reliefweb.int/location-maps) \- Country maps for your reports and presentations.
  * [Humanitarian Icons](https://reliefweb.int/report/world/world-humanitarian-and-country-icons-2012) \- Ready-to-use symbols and icons. Free download.
  * [RSS](https://reliefweb.int/rss) \- Subscribe to information finely tuned to your needs.
  * [Frequently Asked Questions](https://reliefweb.int/faq) \- Get answers to common problems and learn more about ReliefWeb.
  * [Contact Us](https://reliefweb.int/contact) \- Ask questions and suggest improvements.

